We have discussed quite a few data models,
but
there are many other data models
that have been developed for
various purposes, and we really cannot
cover all of them in a single course.
We'll end these lectures on data models
with an example that may give you
an insight into a class of objects that
define in many different applications.
So after this video you'll be able
to describe how arrays can serve
as a data model, explain why images
can be modeled as vector arrays,
specify a set of operations on scalar and
vector arrays.
Now, we have all seen the arrays.
In the simplest case,
an array is a matrix like this.
Let's call this array A.
The top row in yellow,
gives the column numbers and
the left column, also in yellow,
gives the row numbers.
When we need to refer to a value
of the array as A(3, 2),
we mean the value of the cell in row 3 and
column 2.
This is called indexed structure,
where 3 and
2 are the row and column indices that are
necessary to get the value of a data item.
The area has two dimensions.
So hence there are two indexes.
If these were a three dimensional array,
we would have three indexes.
Now earlier,
we have seen that we can represent the two
dimensional array as a three column table.
One column for the row index,
one column for the column index, and
the last column for the value.
Thus a k dimensional array can be
represented as a relation with k
plus one columns.
The number of tuples in this
representation will be the product of
the size of the first dimension times the
size of the second dimension and so forth.
Then in this case,
the size is five in each dimension.
So there are 25 C column tuples in
a relation representing the array.
A more useful situation occurs
when the cells of an array have
a vectors as values.
As you can see in the 2D vector array
here, each cell has a three vector.
That is a vector with three elements.
Therefore, if we want to
receive a cell value and
treat it like before,
we'll get back the whole vector.
Now, this type of data
should look familiar to you,
because images often have a red,
green and blue channels per pixel.
In other words,
images of vector valued arrays where each
array cell has a three color vector.
We can also think of the array model
in the context of satellite images.
Where there are many more channels
depending on the range of wavelengths
each channel catches.
Let us consider the operations
on arrays of vectors.
Because it is a combination of two models,
one can create different combinations of
array operations, vector operations and
composite operations.
Here are some.
The dimension of the array here,
the first operation, is two.
If we pick up any dimension, say one.
The size of it is also two
because they're two elements,
zero and one in each dimension.
As we saw before, the value of the cell
(1,1) is a vector 16, 301, 74.
While the value of A11 component 2 is 74.
The length of the vector is a square root
of the sum of the elements of the vector.
So length of A11 would come to 310.375.
The distance function can be so
simple like the Euclidean distance
function between two vectors or
the cosine of an angle between them
as we saw in the previous lecture.
But it can also be something more complex,
based on the needs of the application.
Obviously one can also perform operations
like selection over indices so
we can ask which cells had
the zero value greater than 25.
Giving as the result zero one and
one zero.
You will experience some of these
operations in your hands on session.